.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Eric L. McCorkle
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 13, 2018
.Dt TRUST 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm trust
.Nd kernel public-key trust database API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In trust/trust.h
.Ft int
.Fn trust_init "unsigned int nroots" "cert_t *roots[]"
.Ft int
.Fn trust_expiry_check "time_t"
.Ft int
.Fn trust_add_cert "cert_t *"
.Ft int
.Fn trust_set_revlist "certid_t *" "revlist_t *"

.Ft int
.Fn trust_check_sig "sig_t *sig" "revlist_t *"

.Ft int
.Fn trust_certs "certid_t *parent" "unsigned int *" "cert_t *certsp[]",
    "int depth" "int flags"
.Pp
In the kernel configuration file:
.Cd "options TRUST"
The kernel public-key trust database is a hierarchal key-store for
public signing keys which are trusted by the kernel.  The trust
database manages trust delegation relationships amongst the keys as
well as their revocation lists and expiration dates.  The central function
of the database is to provide signature-checking functionality which
represents the kernel's notion of trust.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Eric McCorkle .
